All matter is composed of certain constituents (about seventy are at
present known), which, so far as the chemist is concerned, are
indivisible, and are known as elements.

Of the innumerable combinations of these elements, two general classes
may be recognized, organic and inorganic bodies. While it is
impossible, owing to the dependence of all organized matter upon
inorganic matter, to give an absolute definition, we at once recognize
the peculiarities of organic or living bodies as distinguished from
inorganic or non-living ones. All living bodies feed, grow, and
reproduce, these acts being the result of the action of forces
resident within the organism. Inorganic bodies, on the other hand,
remain, as a rule, unchanged so long as they are not acted upon by
external forces.

All living organisms are dependent for existence upon inorganic
matter, and sooner or later return these elements to the sources
whence they came. Thus, a plant extracts from the earth and air
certain inorganic compounds which are converted by the activity of the
plant into a part of its own substance, becoming thus incorporated
into a living organism. After the plant dies, however, it undergoes
decomposition, and the elements are returned again to the earth and
atmosphere from which they were taken.

Investigation has shown that living bodies contain comparatively few
elements, but these are combined into extraordinarily complex
compounds. The following elements appear to be essential to all living
bodies: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, potassium.
Besides these there are several others usually present, but not
apparently essential to all organisms. These include phosphorus, iron,
calcium, sodium, magnesium, chlorine, silicon.

As we examine more closely the structure and functions of organic
bodies, an extraordinary uniformity is apparent in all of them. This
is disguised in the more specialized forms, but in the simpler ones is
very apparent. Owing to this any attempt to separate absolutely the
animal and vegetable kingdoms proves futile.

The science that treats of living things, irrespective of the
distinction between plant and animal, is called "Biology," but for
many purposes it is desirable to recognize the distinctions, making
two departments of Biology,--Botany, treating of plants; and Zoölogy,
of animals. It is with the first of these only that we shall concern
ourselves here.

When one takes up a plant his attention is naturally first drawn to
its general appearance and structure, whether it is a complicated one
like one of the flowering plants, or some humbler member of the
vegetable kingdom,--a moss, seaweed, toadstool,--or even some still
simpler plant like a mould, or the apparently structureless green scum
that floats on a stagnant pond. In any case the impulse is to
investigate the form and structure as far as the means at one's
disposal will permit. Such a study of structure constitutes
"Morphology," which includes two departments,--gross anatomy, or a
general study of the parts; and minute anatomy, or "Histology," in
which a microscopic examination is made of the structure of the
different parts. A special department of Morphology called
"Embryology" is often recognized. This embraces a study of the
development of the organism from its earliest stage, and also the
development of its different members.

From a study of the structure of organisms we get a clue to their
relationships, and upon the basis of such relationships are enabled to
classify them or unite them into groups so as to indicate the degree
to which they are related. This constitutes the division of Botany
usually known as Classification or "Systematic Botany."

Finally, we may study the functions or workings of an organism: how it
feeds, breathes, moves, reproduces. This is "Physiology," and like
classification must be preceded by a knowledge of the structures
concerned.

For the study of the gross anatomy of plants the following articles
will be found of great assistance: 1. a sharp knife, and for more
delicate tissues, a razor; 2. a pair of small, fine-pointed scissors;
3. a pair of mounted needles (these can be made by forcing ordinary
sewing needles into handles of pine or other soft wood); 4. a hand
lens; 5. drawing-paper and pencil, and a note book.

For the study of the lower plants, as well as the histology of the
higher ones, a compound microscope is indispensable. Instruments with
lenses magnifying from about 20 to 500 diameters can be had at a cost
varying from about $20 to $30, and are sufficient for any ordinary
investigations.

Objects to be studied with the compound microscope are usually
examined by transmitted light, and must be transparent enough to allow
the light to pass through. The objects are placed upon small glass
slips (slides), manufactured for the purpose, and covered with
extremely thin plates of glass, also specially made. If the body to be
examined is a large one, thin slices or sections must be made. This
for most purposes may be done with an ordinary razor. Most plant
tissues are best examined ordinarily in water, though of course
specimens so mounted cannot be preserved for any length of time.[1]

[1] For the mounting of permanent preparations, see Chapter XIX.

In addition to the implements used in studying the gross anatomy, the
following will be found useful in histological work: 1. a small
camel's-hair brush for picking up small sections and putting water in
the slides; 2. small forceps for handling delicate objects; 3.
blotting paper for removing superfluous water from the slides and
drawing fluids under the cover glass; 4. pieces of elder or sunflower
pith, for holding small objects while making sections.

In addition to these implements, a few reagents may be recommended for
the simpler histological work. The most important of these are
alcohol, glycerine, potash (a strong solution of potassium hydrate in
water), iodine (either a little of the commercial tincture of iodine
in water, or, better, a solution of iodine in iodide of potassium),
acetic acid, and some staining fluid. (An aqueous or alcoholic
solution of gentian violet or methyl violet is one of the best.)

A careful record should be kept by the student of all work done, both
by means of written notes and drawings. For most purposes pencil
drawings are most convenient, and these should be made with a
moderately soft pencil on unruled paper. If it is desired to make the
drawings with ink, a careful outline should first be made with a hard
pencil and this inked over with India-ink or black drawing ink. Ink
drawings are best made upon light bristol board with a hard,
smooth-finished surface.

When obtainable, the student will do best to work with freshly
gathered specimens; but as these are not always to be had when wanted,
a few words about gathering and preserving material may be of service.

Most of the lower green plants (_algæ_) may be kept for a long time in
glass jars or other vessels, provided care is taken to remove all
dead specimens at first and to renew the water from time to time. They
usually thrive best in a north window where they get little or no
direct sunshine, and it is well to avoid keeping them too warm.

Numbers of the most valuable fungi--_i.e._ the lower plants that are
not green--grow spontaneously on many organic substances that are kept
warm and moist. Fresh bread kept moist and covered with a glass will
in a short time produce a varied crop of moulds, and fresh horse
manure kept in the same way serves to support a still greater number
of fungi.

Mosses, ferns, etc., can be raised with a little care, and of course
very many flowering plants are readily grown in pots.

Most of the smaller parasitic fungi (rusts, mildews, etc.) may be kept
dry for any length of time, and on moistening with a weak solution of
caustic potash will serve nearly as well as freshly gathered specimens
for most purposes.

When it is desired to preserve as perfectly as possible the more
delicate plant structures for future study, strong alcohol is the best
and most convenient preserving agent. Except for loss of color it
preserves nearly all plant tissues perfectly.









If we make a thin slice across the stem of a rapidly growing
plant,--_e.g._ geranium, begonia, celery,--mount it in water, and
examine it microscopically, it will be found to be made up of numerous
cavities or chambers separated by delicate partitions. Often these
cavities are of sufficient size to be visible to the naked eye, and
examined with a hand lens the section appears like a piece of fine
lace, each mesh being one of the chambers visible when more strongly
magnified. These chambers are known as "cells," and of them the whole
plant is built up.


  In order to study the structure of the cell more exactly we will
  select such as may be examined without cutting them. A good example
  is furnished by the common spiderwort (Fig. 1). Attached to the base
  of the stamens (Fig. 85, _B_) are delicate hairs composed of chains
  of cells, which may be examined alive by carefully removing a stamen
  and placing it in a drop of water under a cover glass. Each cell
  (Fig. 1) is an oblong sac, with a delicate colorless wall which
  chemical tests show to be composed of cellulose, a substance closely
  resembling starch. Within this sac, and forming a lining to it, is
  a thin layer of colorless matter containing many fine granules.
  Bands and threads of the same substance traverse the cavity of the
  cell, which is filled with a deep purple homogeneous fluid. This
  fluid, which in most cells is colorless, is called the cell sap, and
  is composed mainly of water. Imbedded in the granular lining of the
  sac is a roundish body (_n_), which itself has a definite membrane,
  and usually shows one or more roundish bodies within, besides an
  indistinctly granular appearance. This body is called the nucleus of
  the cell, and the small one within it, the nucleolus.

  The membrane surrounding the cell is known as the cell wall, and in
  young plant cells is always composed of cellulose.

  The granular substance lining the cell wall (Fig. 1, _pr._) is
  called "protoplasm," and with the nucleus constitutes the living
  part of the cell. If sufficiently magnified, the granules within the
  protoplasm will be seen to be in active streaming motion. This
  movement, which is very evident here, is not often so conspicuous,
  but still may often be detected without difficulty.


The cell may be regarded as the unit of organic structure, and of
cells are built up all of the complicated structures of which the
bodies of the highest plants and animals are composed. We shall find
that the cells may become very much modified for various purposes, but
at first they are almost identical in structure, and essentially the
same as the one we have just considered.


Very many of the lower forms of life consist of but a single cell
which may occasionally be destitute of a cell wall. Such a form is
shown in Figure 2. Here we have a mass of protoplasm with a nucleus
(_n_) and cavities (vacuoles, _v_) filled with cell sap, but no cell
wall. The protoplasm is in constant movement, and by extensions of a
portion of the mass and contraction of other parts, the whole creeps
slowly along. Other naked cells (Fig. 12, _B_; Fig. 16, _C_) are
provided with delicate thread-like processes of protoplasm called
"cilia" (sing. _cilium_), which are in active vibration, and propel
the cell through the water.


  On placing a cell into a fluid denser than the cell sap (_e.g._ a
  ten-per-cent solution of sugar in water), a portion of the water
  will be extracted from the cell, and we shall then see the
  protoplasm receding from the wall (Fig. 4, _C_), showing that it is
  normally in a state of tension due to pressure from within of the
  cell sap. The cell wall shows the same thing though in a less
  degree, owing to its being much more rigid than the protoplasmic
  lining. It is owing to the partial collapsing of the cells,
  consequent on loss of water, that plants wither when the supply of
  water is cut off.

As cells grow, new ones are formed in various ways. If the new cells
remain together, cell aggregates, called tissues, are produced, and
of these tissues are built up the various organs of the higher plants.
The simplest tissues are rows of cells, such as form the hairs
covering the surface of the organs of many flowering plants (Fig. 3),
and are due to a division of the cells in a single direction. If the
divisions take place in three planes, masses of cells, such as make up
the stems, etc., of the higher plants, result (Fig. 4, _A_, _B_).









For the sake of convenience it is desirable to collect into groups
such plants as are evidently related; but as our knowledge of many
forms is still very imperfect, any classification we may adopt must be
to a great extent only provisional, and subject to change at any time,
as new forms are discovered or others become better understood.

The following general divisions are usually accepted: I. Sub-kingdom
(or Branch); II. Class; III. Order; IV. Family; V. Genus; VI. Species.

To illustrate: The white pine belongs to the highest great division
(sub-kingdom) of the plant kingdom. The plants of this division all
produce seeds, and hence are called "spermaphytes" ("seed plants").
They may be divided into two groups (classes), distinguished by
certain peculiarities in the flowers and seeds. These are named
respectively "gymnosperms" and "angiosperms," and to the first our
plant belongs. The gymnosperms may be further divided into several
subordinate groups (orders), one of which, the conifers, or
cone-bearing evergreens, includes our plant. This order includes
several families, among them the fir family (_Abietineæ_), including
the pines and firs. Of the sub-divisions (_genera_, sing. _genus_) of
the fir family, one of the most familiar is the genus _Pinus_, which
embraces all the true pines. Comparing different kinds of pines, we
find that they differ in the form of the cones, arrangement of the
leaves, and other minor particulars. The form we have selected differs
from all other native forms in its cones, and also in having the
leaves in fives, instead of twos or threes, as in most other kinds.
Therefore to distinguish the white pine from all other pines, it is
given a "specific" name, _strobus_.

The following table will show more plainly what is meant:


                         Sub-kingdom,
                        _Spermaphyta_.
         /--------------------^---------------------          Includes all spermaphytes, or seed plants.

                            Class,
                        _Gymnospermæ_.
                 /------------^------------                   All naked-seeded plants.

                            Order,
                         _Coniferæ_.
               /--------------^--------------                 All cone-bearing evergreens.

                           Family,
                         _Abietineæ_.
                     /--------^--------                      Firs, Pines, etc.

                            Genus,
                           _Pinus_.
                          /---^---                            Pines.

                           Species,
                          _Strobus_.
                        /-----^-----                         White Pine.






The name Protophytes (_Protophyta_) has been applied to a large number
of simple plants, which differ a good deal among themselves. Some of
them differ strikingly from the higher plants, and resemble so
remarkably certain low forms of animal life as to be quite
indistinguishable from them, at least in certain stages. Indeed, there
are certain forms that are quite as much animal as vegetable in their
attributes, and must be regarded as connecting the two kingdoms. Such
forms are the slime moulds (Fig. 5), _Euglena_ (Fig. 9), _Volvox_
(Fig. 10), and others.


Other protophytes, while evidently enough of vegetable nature, are
nevertheless very different in some respects from the higher plants.

The protophytes may be divided into three classes: I. The slime moulds
(_Myxomycetes_); II. The Schizophytes; III. The green monads
(_Volvocineæ_).




These curious organisms are among the most puzzling forms with which
the botanist has to do, as they are so much like some of the lowest
forms of animal life as to be scarcely distinguishable from them, and
indeed they are sometimes regarded as animals rather than plants. At
certain stages they consist of naked masses of protoplasm of very
considerable size, not infrequently several centimetres in diameter.
These are met with on decaying logs in damp woods, on rotting leaves,
and other decaying vegetable matter. The commonest ones are bright
yellow or whitish, and form soft, slimy coverings over the substratum
(Fig. 5, _A_), penetrating into its crevices and showing sensitiveness
toward light. The plasmodium, as the mass of protoplasm is called, may
be made to creep upon a slide in the following way: A tumbler is
filled with water and placed in a saucer filled with sand. A strip of
blotting paper about the width of the slide is now placed with one end
in the water, the other hanging over the edge of the glass and against
one side of a slide, which is thus held upright, but must not be
allowed to touch the side of the tumbler. The strip of blotting paper
sucks up the water, which flows slowly down the surface of the slide
in contact with the blotting paper. If now a bit of the substance upon
which the plasmodium is growing is placed against the bottom of the
slide on the side where the stream of water is, the protoplasm will
creep up against the current of water and spread over the slide,
forming delicate threads in which most active streaming movements of
the central granular protoplasm may be seen under the microscope, and
the ends of the branches may be seen to push forward much as we saw in
the amœba. In order that the experiment may be successful, the whole
apparatus should be carefully protected from the light, and allowed to
stand for several hours. This power of movement, as well as the power
to take in solid food, are eminently animal characteristics, though
the former is common to many plants as well.

After a longer or shorter time the mass of protoplasm contracts and
gathers into little heaps, each of which develops into a structure
that has no resemblance to any animal, but would be at once placed
with plants. In one common form (_Trichia_) these are round or
pear-shaped bodies of a yellow color, and about as big as a pin head
(Fig. 5, _D_), occurring in groups on rotten logs in damp woods.
Others are stalked (_Arcyria_, _Stemonitis_) (Fig. 5, _J_, _K_), and
of various colors,--red, brown, etc. The outer part of the structure
is a more or less firm wall, which breaks when ripe, discharging a
powdery mass, mixed in most forms with very fine fibres.

  When strongly magnified the fine dust is found to be made up of
  innumerable small cells with thick walls, marked with ridges or
  processes which differ much in different species. The fibres also
  differ much in different genera. Sometimes they are simple,
  hair-like threads; in others they are hollow tubes with spiral
  thickenings, often very regularly placed, running around their
  walls.

  The spores may sometimes be made to germinate by placing them in a
  drop of water, and allowing them to remain in a warm place for about
  twenty-four hours. If the experiment has been successful, at the end
  of this time the spore membrane will have burst, and the contents
  escaped in the form of a naked mass of protoplasm (Zoöspore) with a
  nucleus, and often showing a vacuole (Fig. 5, _v_), that
  alternately becomes much distended, and then disappears entirely. On
  first escaping it is usually provided with a long, whip-like
  filament of protoplasm, which is in active movement, and by means of
  which the cell swims actively through the water (Fig. 5, _I_ i).
  Sometimes such a cell will be seen to divide into two, the process
  taking but a short time, so that the numbers of these cells under
  favorable conditions may become very large. After a time the lash is
  withdrawn, and the cell assumes much the form of a small amœba (_I_
  ii).

The succeeding stages are difficult to follow. After repeatedly
dividing, a large number of these amœba-like cells run together,
coalescing when they come in contact, and forming a mass of protoplasm
that grows, and finally assumes the form from which it started.

  Of the common forms of slime moulds the species of _Trichia_ (Figs.
  _D_, _I_) and _Physarum_ are, perhaps, the best for studying the
  germination, as the spores are larger than in most other forms, and
  germinate more readily. The experiment is apt to be most successful
  if the spores are sown in a drop of water in which has been infused
  some vegetable matter, such as a bit of rotten wood, boiling
  thoroughly to kill all germs. A drop of this fluid should be placed
  on a perfectly clean cover glass, which it is well to pass once or
  twice through a flame, and the spores transferred to this drop with
  a needle previously heated. By these precautions foreign germs will
  be avoided, which otherwise may interfere seriously with the growth
  of the young slime moulds. After sowing the spores in the drop of
  culture fluid, the whole should be inverted over a so-called "moist
  chamber." This is simply a square of thick blotting paper, in which
  an opening is cut small enough to be entirely covered by the cover
  glass, but large enough so that the drop in the centre of the cover
  glass will not touch the sides of the chamber, but will hang
  suspended clear in it. The blotting paper should be soaked
  thoroughly in pure water (distilled water is preferable), and then
  placed on a slide, covering carefully with the cover glass with the
  suspended drop of fluid containing the spores. The whole should be
  kept under cover so as to prevent loss of water by evaporation. By
  this method the spores may be examined conveniently without
  disturbing them, and the whole may be kept as long as desired, so
  long as the blotting paper is kept wet, so as to prevent the
  suspended drop from drying up.




The Schizophytes are very small plants, though not infrequently
occurring in masses of considerable size. They are among the commonest
of all plants, and are found everywhere. They multiply almost entirely
by simple transverse division, or splitting of the cells, whence their
name. There are two pretty well-marked orders,--the blue-green slimes
(_Cyanophyceæ_) and the bacteria (_Schizomycetes_). They are
distinguished, primarily, by the first (with a very few exceptions)
containing chlorophyll (leaf-green), which is entirely absent from
nearly all of the latter.

The blue-green slimes: These are, with few exceptions, green plants of
simple structure, but possessing, in addition to the ordinary green
pigment (chlorophyll, or leaf-green), another coloring matter, soluble
in water, and usually blue in color, though sometimes yellowish or
red.


As a representative of the group, we will select one of the commonest
forms (_Oscillaria_), known sometimes as green slime, from forming a
dark blue-green or blackish slimy coat over the mud at the bottom of
stagnant or sluggish water, in watering troughs, on damp rocks, or
even on moist earth. A search in the places mentioned can hardly fail
to secure plenty of specimens for study. If a bit of the slimy mass is
transferred to a china dish, or placed with considerable water on a
piece of stiff paper, after a short time the edge of the mass will
show numerous extremely fine filaments of a dark blue-green color,
radiating in all directions from the mass (Fig. 6, _a_). The filaments
are the individual plants, and possess considerable power of motion,
as is shown by letting the mass remain undisturbed for a day or two,
at the end of which time they will have formed a thin film over the
surface of the vessel in which they are kept; and the radiating
arrangement of the filaments can then be plainly seen.

If the mass is allowed to dry on the paper, it often leaves a bright
blue stain, due to the blue pigment in the cells of the filament. This
blue color can also be extracted by pulverizing a quantity of the
dried plants, and pouring water over them, the water soon becoming
tinged with a decided blue. If now the water containing the blue
pigment is filtered, and the residue treated with alcohol, the latter
will extract the chlorophyll, becoming colored of a yellow-green.

  The microscope shows that the filaments of which the mass is
  composed (Fig. 6, _B_) are single rows of short cylindrical cells of
  uniform diameter, except at the end of the filament, where they
  usually become somewhat smaller, so that the tip is more or less
  distinctly pointed. The protoplasm of the cells has a few small
  granules scattered through it, and is colored uniformly of a pale
  blue-green. No nucleus can be seen.

  If the filament is broken, there may generally be detected a
  delicate, colorless sheath that surrounds it, and extends beyond the
  end cells (Fig. 6, _c_). The filament increases in length by the
  individual cells undergoing division, this always taking place at
  right angles to the axis of the filament. New filaments are produced
  simply by the older ones breaking into a number of pieces, each of
  which rapidly grows to full size.

The name "oscillaria" arises from the peculiar oscillating or swinging
movements that the plant exhibits. The most marked movement is a
swaying from side to side, combined with a rotary motion of the free
ends of the filaments, which are often twisted together like the
strands of a rope. If the filaments are entirely free, they may often
be observed to move forward with a slow, creeping movement. Just how
these movements are caused is still a matter of controversy.

The lowest of the _Cyanophyceæ_ are strictly single-celled, separating
as soon as formed, but cohering usually in masses or colonies by means
of a thick mucilaginous substance that surrounds them (Fig. 7, _D_).

The higher ones are filaments, in which there may be considerable
differentiation. These often occur in masses of considerable size,
forming jelly-like lumps, which may be soft or quite firm (Fig. 7,
_A_, _B_). They are sometimes found on damp ground, but more commonly
attached to plants, stones, etc., in water. The masses vary in color
from light brown to deep blackish green, and in size from that of a
pin head to several centimetres in diameter.



In the higher forms special cells called heterocysts are found. They
are colorless, or light yellowish, regularly disposed; but their
function is not known. Besides these, certain cells become
thick-walled, and form resting cells (spores) for the propagation of
the plant (Fig. 7, C. _sp._). In species where the sheath of the
filament is well marked (Fig. 7, _H_), groups of cells slip out of the
sheath, and develop a new one, thus giving rise to a new plant.

The bacteria (_Schizomycetes_), although among the commonest of
organisms, owing to their excessive minuteness, are difficult to
study, especially for the beginner. They resemble, in their general
structure and methods of reproduction, the blue-green slimes, but are,
with very few exceptions, destitute of chlorophyll, although often
possessing bright pigments,--blue, violet, red, etc. It is one of
these that sometimes forms blood-red spots in flour paste or bits of
bread that have been kept very moist and warm. They are universally
present where decomposition is going on, and are themselves the
principal agents of decay, which is the result of their feeding upon
the substance, as, like all plants without chlorophyll, they require
organic matter for food. Most of the species are very tenacious of
life, and may be completely dried up for a long time without dying,
and on being placed in water will quickly revive. Being so extremely
small, they are readily carried about in the air in their dried-up
condition, and thus fall upon exposed bodies, setting up decomposition
if the conditions are favorable.

A simple experiment to show this may be performed by taking two test
tubes and partly filling them with an infusion of almost any organic
substance (dried leaves or hay, or a bit of meat will answer). The
fluid should now be boiled so as to kill any germs that may be in it;
and while hot, one of the vessels should be securely stopped up with a
plug of cotton wool, and the other left open. The cotton prevents
access of all solid particles, but allows the air to enter. If proper
care has been taken, the infusion in the closed vessel will remain
unchanged indefinitely; but the other will soon become turbid, and a
disagreeable odor will be given off. Microscopic examination shows the
first to be free from germs of any kind, while the second is swarming
with various forms of bacteria.



These little organisms have of late years attracted the attention of
very many scientists, from the fact that to them is due many, if not
all, contagious diseases. The germs of many such diseases have been
isolated, and experiments prove beyond doubt that these are alone the
causes of the diseases in question.

  If a drop of water containing bacteria is examined, we find them to
  be excessively small, many of them barely visible with the strongest
  lenses. The larger ones (Fig. 8) recall quite strongly the smaller
  species of oscillaria, and exhibit similar movements. Others are so
  small as to appear as mere lines and dots, even with the strongest
  lenses. Among the common forms are small, nearly globular cells;
  oblong, rod-shaped or thread-shaped filaments, either straight or
  curved, or even spirally twisted. Frequently they show a quick
  movement which is probably in all cases due to cilia, which are,
  however, too small to be seen in most cases.


Reproduction is for the most part by simple transverse division, as in
oscillaria; but occasionally spores are produced also.




This group of the protophytes is unquestionably closely related to
certain low animals (_Monads_ or _Flagellata_), with which they are
sometimes united. They are characterized by being actively motile, and
are either strictly unicellular, or the cells are united by a
gelatinous envelope into a colony of definite form.

Of the first group, _Euglena_ (Fig. 9), may be selected as a type.

  This organism is found frequently among other algæ, and occasionally
  forms a green film on stagnant water. It is sometimes regarded as a
  plant, sometimes as an animal, and is an elongated, somewhat
  worm-like cell without a definite cell wall, so that it can change
  its form to some extent. The protoplasm contains oval masses, which
  are bright green in color; but the forward pointed end of the cell
  is colorless, and has a little depression. At this end there is a
  long vibratile protoplasmic filament (_c_), by means of which the
  cell moves. There is also to be seen near this end a red speck (_e_)
  which is probably sensitive to light. A nucleus can usually be seen
  if the cell is first killed with an iodine solution, which often
  will render the flagellum (_c_) more evident, this being invisible
  while the cell is in motion. The cells multiply by division.
  Previous to this the flagellum is withdrawn, and a firm cell wall is
  formed about the cell (Fig. 9, _B_). The contents then divide into
  two or more parts, which afterwards escape as new individuals.

Of the forms that are united in colonies[2] one of the best known is
_Volvox_ (Fig. 10). This plant is sometimes found in quiet water,
where it floats on or near the surface as a dark green ball, just
large enough to be seen with the naked eye. They may be kept for some
time in aquaria, and will sometimes multiply rapidly, but are very
susceptible to extremes of temperature, especially of heat.

[2] The term "colony" is, perhaps, inappropriate, as the whole mass of
cells arises from a single one, and may properly be looked upon as an
individual plant.



  The colony (Fig. 10, _A_) is a hollow sphere, the numerous green
  cells of which it is composed forming a single layer on the outside.
  By killing with iodine, and using a strong lens, each cell is seen
  to be somewhat pear-shaped (Fig. _B_), with the pointed end out.
  Attached to this end are two vibratile filaments (cilia or
  _flagella_), and the united movements of these cause the rolling
  motion of the whole colony. Usually a number of young colonies
  (Fig. _x_) are found within the mother colony. These arise by the
  repeated bipartition of a single cell, and escape finally, forming
  independent colonies.

  Another (sexual) form of reproduction occurs, similar to that found
  in many higher plants; but as it only occurs at certain seasons, it
  is not likely to be met with by the student.

Other forms related to _Volvox_, and sometimes met with, are
_Gonium_, in which there are sixteen cells, forming a flat square;
_Pandorina_ and _Eudorina_, with sixteen cells, forming an oval or
globular colony like _Volvox_, but much smaller. In all of these the
structure of the cells is essentially as in _Volvox_.











[3] Algæ (sing. _alga_).

In the second sub-kingdom of plants is embraced an enormous assemblage
of plants, differing widely in size and complexity, and yet showing a
sufficiently complete gradation from the lowest to the highest as to
make it impracticable to make more than one sub-kingdom to include
them. They are nearly all aquatic forms, although many of them will
survive long periods of drying, such forms occurring on moist earth,
rocks, or the trunks of trees, but only growing when there is a
plentiful supply of water.

All of them possess chlorophyll, which, however, in many forms, is
hidden by the presence of a brown or red pigment. They are ordinarily
divided into three classes--I. The Green Algæ (_Chlorophyceæ_);





The green algæ are to be found almost everywhere where there is
moisture, but are especially abundant in sluggish or stagnant fresh
water, being much less common in salt water. They are for the most
part plants of simple structure, many being unicellular, and very few
of them plants of large size.

We may recognize five well-marked orders of the green algæ--I. Green
slimes (_Protococcaceæ_); II. _Confervaceæ_; III. Pond scums
(_Conjugatæ_); IV. _Siphoneæ_; V. Stone-worts (_Characeæ_).




The members of this order are minute unicellular plants, growing
either in water or on the damp surfaces of stones, tree trunks, etc.
The plants sometimes grow isolated, but usually the cells are united
more or less regularly into colonies.

A common representative of the order is the common green slime,
_Protococcus_ (Fig. 11, _A_, _C_), which forms a dark green slimy
coating over stones, tree trunks, flower pots, etc. Owing to their
minute size the structure can only be made out with the microscope.



  Scraping off a little of the material mentioned into a drop of water
  upon a slide, and carefully separating it with needles, a cover
  glass may be placed over the preparation, and it is ready for
  examination. When magnified, the green film is found to be composed
  of minute globular cells of varying size, which may in places be
  found to be united into groups. With a higher power, each cell
  (Fig. 11, _A_) is seen to have a distinct cell wall, within which is
  colorless protoplasm. Careful examination shows that the chlorophyll
  is confined to several roundish bodies that are not usually in
  immediate contact with the wall of the cell. These green masses are
  called chlorophyll bodies (chloroplasts). Toward the centre of the
  cell, especially if it has first been treated with iodine, the
  nucleus may be found. The size of the cells, as well as the number
  of chloroplasts, varies a good deal.

  With a little hunting, specimens in various stages of division may
  be found. The division takes place in two ways. In the first
  (Fig. 11, _B_), known as fission, a wall is formed across the cell,
  dividing it into two cells, which may separate immediately or may
  remain united until they have undergone further division. In this
  case the original cell wall remains as part of the wall of the
  daughter cells. Fission is the commonest form of cell multiplication
  throughout the vegetable kingdom.

  The second form of cell division or internal cell division is shown
  at _C_. Here the protoplasm and nucleus repeatedly divide until a
  number of small cells are formed within the old one. These develop
  cell walls, and escape by the breaking of the old cell wall, which
  is left behind, and takes no part in the process. The cells thus
  formed are sometimes provided with two cilia, and are capable of
  active movement.

  Internal cell division, as we shall see, is found in most plants,
  but only at special times.

  Closely resembling _Protococcus_, and answering quite as well for
  study, are numerous aquatic forms, such as _Chlorococcum_ (Fig. 12).
  These are for the most part destitute of a firm cell wall, but are
  imbedded in masses of gelatinous substance like many _Cyanophyceæ_.
  The chloroplasts are smaller and less distinct than in
  _Protococcus_. The cells are here oval rather than round, and often
  show a clear space at one end.



  Owing to the absence of a definite membrane, a distinction between
  fission and internal cell division can scarcely be made here. Often
  the cells escape from the gelatinous envelope, and swim actively by
  means of two cilia at the colorless end (Fig. 12, _B_). In this
  stage they closely resemble the individuals of a _Volvox_ colony, or
  other green _Flagellata_, to which there is little doubt that they
  are related.

  There are a number of curious forms common in fresh water that are
  probably related to _Protococcus_, but differ in having the cells
  united in colonies of definite form. Among the most striking are
  the different species of _Pediastrum_ (Fig. 11, _D_, _E_), often met
  with in company with other algæ, and growing readily in aquaria when
  once established. They are of very elegant shapes, and the number of
  cells some multiple of four, usually sixteen.

  The cells form a flat disc, the outer ones being generally provided
  with a pair of spines.

  New individuals arise by internal division of the cells, the
  contents of each forming as many parts as there are cells in the
  whole colony. The young cells now escape through a cleft in the wall
  of the mother cell, but are still surrounded by a delicate membrane
  (Fig. 11, _E_). Within this membrane the young cells arrange
  themselves in the form of the original colony, and grow together,
  forming a new colony.

  A much larger but rarer form is the water net (Fig. 11, _G_), in
  which the colony has the form of a hollow net, the spaces being
  surrounded by long cylindrical cells placed end to end. Other common
  forms belong to the genus _Scenedesmus_ (Fig. 11, _F_), of which
  there are many species.




Under this head are included a number of forms of which the simplest
ones approach closely, especially in their younger stages, the
_Protococcaceæ_. Indeed, some of the so-called _Protococcaceæ_ are
known to be only the early stages of these plants.

A common member of this order is _Cladophora_, a coarse-branching
alga, growing commonly in running water, where it forms tufts,
sometimes a metre or more in length. By floating out a little of it in
a saucer, it is easy to see that it is made up of branching filaments.

  The microscope shows (Fig. 13, _A_) that these filaments are rows of
  cylindrical cells with thick walls showing evident stratification.
  At intervals branches are given off, which may in turn branch,
  giving rise to a complicated branching system. These branches begin
  as little protuberances of the cell wall at the top of the cell.
  They increase rapidly in length, and becoming slightly contracted at
  the base, a wall is formed across at this point, shutting it off
  from the mother cell.

  The protoplasm lines the wall of the cell, and extends in the form
  of thin plates across the cavity of the cell, dividing it up into a
  number of irregular chambers. Imbedded in the protoplasm are
  numerous flattened chloroplasts, which are so close together as to
  make the protoplasm appear almost uniformly green. Within the
  chloroplasts are globular, glistening bodies, called "pyrenoids."
  The cell has several nuclei, but they are scarcely evident in the
  living cell. By placing the cells for a few hours in a one per cent
  watery solution of chromic acid, then washing thoroughly and
  staining with borax carmine, the nuclei will be made very evident
  (Fig. 13, _B_). Such preparations may be kept permanently in dilute
  glycerine.



  If a mass of actively growing filaments is examined, some of the
  cells will probably be found in process of fission. The process is
  very simple, and may be easily followed (Fig. 13, _C_). A ridge of
  cellulose is formed around the cell wall, projecting inward, and
  pushing in the protoplasm as it grows. The process is continued
  until the ring closes in the middle, cutting the protoplasmic body
  completely in two, and forms a firm membrane across the middle of
  the cell. The protoplasm at this stage (_C_ iii.) is somewhat
  contracted, but soon becomes closely applied to the new wall. The
  whole process lasts, at ordinary temperatures (20°-25° C.), from
  three to four hours.

  At certain times, but unfortunately not often to be met with, the
  contents of some of the cells form, by internal division, a large
  number of small, naked cells (zoöspores) (Fig. 13, _D_), which
  escape and swim about actively for a time, and afterwards become
  invested with a cell wall, and grow into a new filament. These cells
  are called zoöspores, from their animal-like movements. They are
  provided with two cilia, closely resembling the motile cells of the
  _Protococcaceæ_ and _Volvocineæ_.

There are very many examples of these simple _Confervaceæ_, some like
_Conferva_ being simple rows of cells, others like _Stigeoclonium_
(Fig. 14, _A_), _Chætophora_ and _Draparnaldia_ (Fig. 14, _B_, _C_),
very much branched. The two latter forms are surrounded by masses of
transparent jelly, which sometimes reach a length of several
centimetres.



Among the marine forms related to these may be mentioned the sea
lettuce (_Ulva_), shown in Figure 15. The thin, bright-green,
leaf-like fronds of this plant are familiar to every seaside student.

Somewhat higher than _Cladophora_ and its allies, especially in the
differentiation of the reproductive parts, are the various species of
_Œdogonium_ and its relatives. There are numerous species of
_Œdogonium_ not uncommon in stagnant water growing in company with
other algæ, but seldom forming masses by themselves of sufficient size
to be recognizable to the naked eye.

  The plant is in structure much like _Cladophora_, except that it is
  unbranched, and the cells have but a single nucleus (Fig. 16, _E_).
  Even when not fruiting the filaments may usually be recognized by
  peculiar cap-shaped structures at the top of some of the cells.
  These arise as the result of certain peculiarities in the process of
  cell division, which are too complicated to be explained here.

  There are two forms of reproduction, non-sexual and sexual. In the
  first the contents of certain cells escape in the form of large
  zoöspores (Fig. 16, _C_), of oval form, having the smaller end
  colorless and surrounded by a crown of cilia. After a short period
  of active motion, the zoöspore comes to rest, secretes a cell wall
  about itself, and the transparent end becomes flattened out into a
  disc (_E_, _d_), by which it fastens itself to some object in the
  water. The upper part now rapidly elongates, and dividing repeatedly
  by cross walls, develops into a filament like the original one. In
  many species special zoöspores are formed, smaller than the ordinary
  ones, that attach themselves to the filaments bearing the female
  reproductive organ (oögonium), and grow into small plants bearing
  the male organ (antheridium), (Fig. 16, _B_).


  The sexual reproduction takes place as follows: Certain cells of a
  filament become distinguished by their denser contents and by an
  increase in size, becoming oval or nearly globular in form (Fig. 16,
  _A_, _B_). When fully grown, the contents contract and form a naked
  cell, which sometimes shows a clear area at one point on the
  surface. This globular mass of protoplasm is the egg cell, or female
  cell, and the cell containing it is called the "oögonium." When the
  egg cell is ripe, the oögonium opens by means of a little pore at
  one side (Fig. 16, _A_).

  In other cells, either of the same filament or else of the small
  male plants already mentioned, small motile cells, called
  spermatozoids, are formed. These are much smaller than the egg cell,
  and resemble the zoöspores in form, but are much smaller, and
  without chlorophyll. When ripe they are discharged from the cells in
  which they were formed, and enter the oögonium. By careful
  observation the student may possibly be able to follow the
  spermatozoid into the oögonium, where it enters the egg cell at the
  clear spot on its surface. As a result of the entrance of the
  spermatozoid (fertilization), the egg cell becomes surrounded by a
  thick brown wall, and becomes a resting spore. The spore loses its
  green color, and the wall becomes dark colored and differentiated
  into several layers, the outer one often provided with spines
  (Fig. 16, _F_). As these spores do not germinate for a long time,
  the process is only known in a comparatively small number of
  species, and can hardly be followed by the ordinary student.


Much like _Œdogonium_, but differing in being branched, is the genus
_Bulbochæte_, characterized also by hairs swollen at the base, and
prolonged into a delicate filament (Fig. 16, _G_).

The highest members of the _Confervaceæ_ are those of the genus
_Coleochæte_ (Fig. 17), of which there are several species found in
the United States. These show some striking resemblances to the red
seaweeds, and possibly form a transition from the green algæ to the
red. The commonest species form bright-green discs, adhering firmly
to the stems and floating leaves of water lilies and other aquatics.
In aquaria they sometimes attach themselves in large numbers to the
glass sides of the vessel.

  Growing from the upper surface are numerous hairs, consisting of a
  short, sheath-like base, including a very long and delicate filament
  (Fig. 17, _B_). In their methods of reproduction they resemble
  _Œdogonium_, but the reproductive organs are more specialized.











The _Conjugatæ_, while in some respects approaching the _Confervaceæ_
in structure, yet differ from them to such an extent in some respects
that their close relationship is doubtful. They are very common and
familiar plants, some of them forming great floating masses upon the
surface of every stagnant pond and ditch, being commonly known as
"pond scum." The commonest of these pond scums belong to the genus
_Spirogyra_, and one of these will illustrate the characteristics of
the order. When in active growth these masses are of a vivid green,
and owing to the presence of a gelatinous coating feel slimy, slipping
through the hands when one attempts to lift them from the water.
Spread out in water, the masses are seen to be composed of slender
threads, often many centimetres in length, and showing no sign of
branching.



  For microscopical examination the larger species are preferable.
  When one of these is magnified (Fig. 18, _A_, _C_), the unbranched
  filament is shown to be made up of perfectly cylindrical cells, with
  rather delicate walls. The protoplasm is confined to a thin layer
  lining the walls, except for numerous fine filaments that radiate
  from the centrally placed nucleus (_n_), which thus appears
  suspended in the middle of the cell. The nucleus is large and
  distinct in the larger species, and has a noticeably large and
  conspicuous nucleolus. The most noticeable thing about the cell is
  the green spiral bands running around it. These are the
  chloroplasts, which in all the _Conjugatæ_ are of very peculiar
  forms. The number of these bands varies much in different species of
  _Spirogyra_, but is commonly two or three. These chloroplasts, like
  those of other plants, are not noticeably different in structure
  from the ordinary protoplasm, as is shown by extracting the
  chlorophyll, which may be done by placing the plants in alcohol for
  a short time. This extracts the chlorophyll, but a microscopic
  examination of the decolored cells shows that the bands remain
  unchanged, except for the absence of color. These bands are
  flattened, with irregularly scalloped margins, and at intervals have
  rounded bodies (pyrenoids) imbedded in them (Fig. 18, _C_, _py._).
  The pyrenoids, especially when the plant has been exposed to the
  light for some time, are surrounded by a circle of small granules,
  which become bluish when iodine is applied, showing them to be
  starch. (To show the effect of iodine on starch on a large scale,
  mix a little flour, which is nearly all starch, with water, and add
  a little iodine. The starch will immediately become colored blue,
  varying in intensity with the amount of iodine.) The cells divide
  much as in _Cladophora_, but the nucleus here takes part in the
  process. The division naturally occurs only at night, but by
  reducing the temperature at night to near the freezing point (4° C.,
  or a little lower), the process may be checked. The experiment is
  most conveniently made when the temperature out of doors approaches
  the freezing point. Then it is only necessary to keep the plants in
  a warm room until about 10 P.M., when they may be put out of doors
  for the night. On bringing them in in the morning, the division will
  begin almost at once, and may be easily studied. The nucleus divides
  into two parts, which remain for a time connected by delicate
  threads (Fig. 18, _B_), that finally disappear. At first no nucleoli
  are present in the daughter nuclei, but they appear before the
  division is complete.

  New filaments are formed by the breaking up of the old ones, this
  sometimes being very rapid. As the cells break apart, the free ends
  bulge strongly, showing the pressure exerted upon the cell wall by
  the contents (Fig. 18, _A_).

Spores like those of _Œdogonium_ are formed, but the process is
somewhat different. It occurs in most species late in the spring, but
may sometimes be met with at other times. The masses of fruiting
plants usually appear brownish colored. If spores have been formed
they can, in the larger species at least, be seen with a hand lens,
appearing as rows of dark-colored specks.

  Two filaments lying side by side send out protuberances of the cell
  wall that grow toward each other until they touch (Fig. 18, _D_). At
  the point of contact, the wall is absorbed, forming a continuous
  channel from one cell to the other. This process usually takes place
  in all the cells of the two filaments, so that the two filaments,
  connected by tubes at regular intervals, have the form of a ladder.

  In some species adjoining cells of the same filament become
  connected, the tubes being formed at the end of the cells (Fig. 18,
  _H_), and the cell in which the spore is formed enlarges.

  Soon after the channel is completed, the contents of one cell flow
  slowly through it into the neighboring cell, and the protoplasm of
  the two fuses into one mass. (The union of the nuclei has also been
  observed.) The young spore thus formed contracts somewhat, becoming
  oval in form, and soon secretes a thick wall, colorless at first,
  but afterwards becoming brown and more or less opaque. The
  chlorophyll bands, although much crowded, are at first
  distinguishable, but later lose the chlorophyll, and become
  unrecognizable. Like the resting spores of _Œdogonium_ these require
  a long period of rest before germinating.


There are various genera of the pond scums, differing in the form of
the chloroplasts and also in the position of the spores. Of these may
be mentioned _Zygnema_ (Fig. 19, _A_), with two star-shaped
chloroplasts in each cell, and _Mesocarpus_ (Fig. 19, _B_, _D_), in
which the single chloroplast has the form of a thin median plate. (B
shows the appearance from in front, _C_ from the side, showing the
thickness of the plate.) _Mesocarpus_ and the allied genera have the
spore formed between the filaments, the contents of both the uniting
cells leaving them.


Evidently related to the pond scums, but differing in being for the
most part strictly unicellular, are the desmids (Fig. 20). They are
confined to fresh water, and seldom occur in masses of sufficient size
to be seen with the naked eye, usually being found associated with
pond scums or other filamentous forms. Many of the most beautiful
forms may be obtained by examining the matter adhering to the leaves
and stems of many floating water plants, especially the bladder weed
(_Utricularia_) and other fine-leaved aquatics.

  The desmids include the most beautiful examples of unicellular
  plants to be met with, the cells having extremely elegant outlines.
  The cell shows a division into two parts, and is often constricted
  in the middle, each division having a single large chloroplast of
  peculiar form. The central part of the cell in which the nucleus
  lies is colorless.

  Among the commonest forms, often growing with _Spirogyra_, are
  various species of _Closterium_ (Fig. 20, _A_, _B_), recognizable at
  once by their crescent shape. The cell appears bright green, except
  at the ends and in the middle. The large chloroplast in each half is
  composed of six longitudinal plates, united at the axis of the cell.
  Several large pyrenoids are always found, often forming a regular
  line through the central axis. At each end of the cell is a vacuole
  containing small granules that show an active dancing movement.

The desmids often have the power of movement, swimming or creeping
slowly over the slide as we examine them, but the mechanism of these
movements is still doubtful.

In their reproduction they closely resemble the pond scums.




The _Siphoneæ_ are algæ occurring both in fresh and salt water, and
are distinguished from other algæ by having the form of a tube,
undivided by partition walls, except when reproduction occurs. The
only common representatives of the order in fresh water are those
belonging to the genus _Vaucheria_, but these are to be had almost
everywhere. They usually occur in shallow ditches and ponds, growing
on the bottom, or not infrequently becoming free, and floating where
the water is deeper. They form large, dark green, felted masses, and
are sometimes known as "green felts." Some species grow also on the
wet ground about springs. An examination of one of the masses shows it
to be made up of closely matted, hair-like threads, each of which is
an individual plant.

  In transferring the plants to the slide for microscopic examination,
  they must be handled very carefully, as they are very easily
  injured. Each thread is a long tube, branching sometimes, but not
  divided into cells as in _Spirogyra_ or _Cladophora_. If we follow
  it to the tip, the contents here will be found to be denser, this
  being the growing point. By careful focusing it is easy to show that
  the protoplasm is confined to a thin layer lining the wall, the
  central cavity of the tube being filled with cell sap. In the
  protoplasm are numerous elongated chloroplasts (_cl._). and a larger
  or smaller number of small, shining, globular bodies (_ol._). These
  latter are drops of oil, and, when the filaments are injured,
  sometimes run together, and form drops of large size. No nucleus can
  be seen in the living plant, but by treatment with chromic acid and
  staining, numerous very small nuclei may be demonstrated.



  When the filaments are growing upon the ground, or at the bottom of
  shallow water, the lower end is colorless, and forms a more or less
  branching root-like structure, fastening it to the earth. These
  rootlets, like the rest of the filament, are undivided by walls.

  One of the commonest and at the same time most characteristic
  species is _Vaucheria racemosa_ (Fig. 21, _A_, _F_). The plant
  multiplies non-sexually by branches pinched off by a constriction at
  the point where they join the main filament, or by the filament
  itself becoming constricted and separating into several parts, each
  one constituting a new individual.

  The sexual organs are formed on special branches, and their
  arrangement is such as to make the species instantly recognizable.

  The first sign of their development is the formation of a short
  branch (Fig. 21, _A_) growing out at right angles to the main
  filament. This branch becomes club-shaped, and the end somewhat
  pointed and more slender, and curves over. This slender, curved
  portion is almost colorless, and is soon shut off from the rest of
  the branch. It is called an "antheridium," and within are produced,
  by internal division, numerous excessively small spermatozoids.

  As the branch grows, its contents become very dense, the oil drops
  especially increasing in number and size. About the time that the
  antheridium becomes shut off, a circle of buds appears about its
  base (Fig. 21, _B_, _og._). These are the young oögonia, which
  rapidly increase in size, assuming an oval form, and become
  separated by walls from the main branch (_C_). Unlike the
  antheridium, the oögonia contain a great deal of chlorophyll,
  appearing deep green.

  When ripe, the antheridium opens at the end and discharges the
  spermatozoids, which are, however, so very small as scarcely to be
  visible except with the strongest lenses. They are little oval
  bodies with two cilia, which may sometimes be rendered visible by
  staining with iodine.



  The oögonia, which at first are uniformly colored, just before
  maturity show a colorless space at the top, from which the
  chloroplasts and oil drops have disappeared (_D_), and at the same
  time this portion pushes out in the form of a short beak. Soon after
  the wall is absorbed at this point, and a portion of the contents is
  forced out, leaving an opening, and at the same time the remaining
  contents contract to form a round mass, the germ or egg cell
  (Fig. 21, _E_, _o_). Almost as soon as the oögonium opens, the
  spermatozoids collect about it and enter; but, on account of their
  minuteness, it is almost impossible to follow them into the egg
  cell, or to determine whether several or only one enter. The
  fertilized egg cell becomes almost at once surrounded by a wall,
  which rapidly thickens, and forms a resting spore. As the spore
  ripens, it loses its green color, becoming colorless, with a few
  reddish brown specks scattered through it (_F_).

  In some species the sexual organs are borne directly on the filament
  (Fig. 21, _G_).

  Large zoöspores are formed in some of the green felts (Fig. 22,
  _A_), and are produced singly in the ends of branches that become
  swollen, dark green, and filled with very dense protoplasm. This end
  becomes separated by a wall from the rest of the branch, the end
  opens, and the contents escape as a very large zoöspore, covered
  with numerous short cilia (_A_ ii). After a short period of
  activity, this loses its cilia, develops a wall, and begins to grow
  (III, IV). Other species (_B_) produce similar spores, which,
  however, are not motile, and remain within the mother cell until
  they are set free by the decay of its wall.




The _Characeæ_, or stone-worts, as some of them are called, are so
very different from the other green algæ that it is highly probable
that they should be separated from them.

The type of the order is the genus _Chara_ (Fig. 23), called
stone-worts from the coating of carbonate of lime found in most of
them, giving them a harsh, stony texture. Several species are common
growing upon the bottom of ponds and slow streams, and range in size
from a few centimetres to a metre or more in height.

The plant (Fig. 23, _A_) consists of a central jointed axis with
circles of leaves at each joint or node. The distance between the
nodes (internodes) may in the larger species reach a length of several
centimetres. The leaves are slender, cylindrical structures, and like
the stem divided into nodes and internodes, and have at the nodes
delicate leaflets.

At each joint of the leaf, in fruiting specimens, attached to the
inner side, are borne two small, roundish bodies, in the commoner
species of a reddish color (Fig. 23, _A_, _r_). The lower of the two
is globular, and bright scarlet in color; the other, more oval and
duller.

Examined with a lens the main axis presents a striated appearance. The
whole plant is harsh to the touch and brittle, owing to the limy
coating. It is fastened to the ground by fine, colorless hairs, or
rootlets.



  By making a series of longitudinal sections with a sharp razor
  through the top of the plant, and magnifying sufficiently, it is
  found to end in a single, nearly hemispherical cell (Fig. 23, _B_,
  _S_). This from its position is called the "apical cell," and from
  it are derived all the tissues of the plant. Segments are cut off
  from its base, and these divide again into two by a wall parallel to
  the first. Of the two cells thus formed one undergoes no further
  division and forms the central cell of an internode (_y_); the other
  divides repeatedly, forming a node or joint (_x_).

  As the arrangement of these cells is essentially the same in the
  leaves and stem, we will examine it in the former, as by cutting
  several cross-sections of the whole bunch of young leaves near the
  top of the plant, we shall pretty certainly get some sections
  through a joint. The arrangement is shown in Figure 23, _E_.

  As the stem grows, a covering is formed over the large internodal
  cell (_y_) by the growth of cells from the nodes. These grow both
  from above and below, meeting in the middle of the internode and
  completely hiding the long axial cell. A section across the
  internode shows the large axial cell (_y_) surrounded by the
  regularly arranged cells of the covering or cortex (Fig. 23, _D_).

  All the cells contain a layer of protoplasm next the wall with
  numerous oval chloroplasts. If the cells are uninjured, they often
  show a very marked movement of the protoplasm. These movements are
  best seen, however, in forms like _Nitella_, where the long
  internodal cells are not covered with a cortex. In _Chara_ they are
  most evident in the root hairs that fasten the plant to the ground.

  The growth of the leaves is almost identical with that of the stem,
  but the apical growth is limited, and the apical cell becomes
  finally very long and pointed (Fig. 23, _C_). In some species the
  chloroplasts are reddish in the young cells, assuming their green
  color as the cells approach maturity.

The plant multiplies non-sexually by means of special branches that
may become detached, but there are no non-sexual spores formed.

  The sexual organs have already been noticed arising in pairs at the
  joints of the leaves. The oögonium is formed above, the antheridium
  below.

  The young oögonium (_F_, _O_) consists of a central cell, below
  which is a smaller one surrounded by a circle of five others, which
  do not at first project above the central cell, but later completely
  envelop it (_G_). Each of these five cells early becomes divided
  into an upper and a lower one, the latter becoming twisted as it
  elongates, and the central cell later has a small cell cut off from
  its base by an oblique wall. The central cell forms the egg cell,
  which in the ripe oögonium (_L_, _O_) is surrounded by five,
  spirally twisted cells, and crowned by a circle of five smaller
  ones, which become of a yellowish color when full grown. They
  separate at the time of fertilization to allow the spermatozoids to
  enter the oögonium.

  The antheridium consists at first of a basal cell and a terminal
  one. The latter, which is nearly globular, divides into eight nearly
  similar cells by walls passing through the centre. In each of these
  eight cells two walls are next formed parallel to the outer surface,
  so that the antheridium (apart from the basal cell) contains
  twenty-four cells arranged in three concentric series (_G_, _an._).
  These cells, especially the outer ones, develop a great amount of a
  red pigment, giving the antheridium its characteristic color.

  The diameter of the antheridium now increases rapidly, and the
  central cells separate, leaving a large space within. Of the inner
  cells, the second series, while not increasing in diameter,
  elongate, assuming an oblong form, and from the innermost are
  developed long filaments (_I_, _J_) composed of a single row of
  cells, in each of which is formed a spermatozoid.

  The eight outer cells are nearly triangular in outline, fitting
  together by deeply indented margins, and having the oblong cells
  with the attached filaments upon their inner faces.

  If a ripe antheridium is crushed in a drop of water, after lying a
  few minutes the spermatozoids will escape through small openings in
  the side of the cells. They are much larger than any we have met
  with. Each is a colorless, spiral thread with about three coils, one
  end being somewhat dilated with a few granules; the other more
  pointed, and bearing two extremely long and delicate cilia (_K_). To
  see the cilia it is necessary to kill the spermatozoids with iodine
  or some other reagent.

  After fertilization the outer cells of the oögonium become very
  hard, and the whole falls off, germinating after a sufficient period
  of rest.

According to the accounts of Pringsheim and others, the young plant
consists at first of a row of elongated cells, upon which a bud is
formed that develops into the perfect plant.

There are two families of the _Characeæ_, the _Chareæ_, of which
_Chara_ is the type, and the _Nitelleæ_, represented by various
species of _Nitella_ and _Tolypella_. The second family have the
internodes without any cortex--that is, consisting of a single long
cell; and the crown at the top of the oögonium is composed of ten
cells instead of five. They are also destitute of the limy coating of
the _Chareæ_.

Both as regards the structure of the plant itself, as well as the
reproductive organs, especially the very complex antheridium, the
_Characeæ_ are very widely separated from any other group of plants,
either above or below them.











These plants are all characterized by the presence of a brown pigment,
in addition to the chlorophyll, which almost entirely conceals the
latter, giving the plants a brownish color, ranging from a light
yellowish brown to nearly black. One order of plants that possibly
belongs here (_Diatomaceæ_) are single celled, but the others are for
the most part large seaweeds. The diatoms, which are placed in this
class simply on account of the color, are probably not closely related
to the other brown algæ, but just where they should be placed is
difficult to say. In some respects they approach quite closely the
desmids, and are not infrequently regarded as related to them. They
are among the commonest of organisms occurring everywhere in stagnant
and running water, both fresh and salt, forming usually, slimy,
yellowish coatings on stones, mud, aquatic plants, etc. Like the
desmids they may be single or united into filaments, and not
infrequently are attached by means of a delicate gelatinous stalk
(Fig. 25).


  They are at once distinguished from the desmids by their color,
  which is always some shade of yellowish or reddish brown. The
  commonest forms, _e.g._ _Navicula_ (Fig. 24, _C_), are boat-shaped
  when seen from above, but there is great variety in this respect.
  The cell wall is always impregnated with large amounts of flint, so
  that after the cell dies its shape is perfectly preserved, the flint
  making a perfect cast of it, looking like glass. These flinty shells
  exhibit wonderfully beautiful and delicate markings which are
  sometimes so fine as to test the best lenses to make them out.

  This shell is composed of two parts, one shutting over the other
  like a pill box and its cover. This arrangement is best seen in such
  large forms as _Pinnularia_ (Fig. 24, _A_ ii).

Most of the diatoms show movements, swimming slowly or gliding over
solid substances; but like the movements of _Oscillaria_ and the
desmids, the movements are not satisfactorily understood, although
several explanations have been offered.

They resemble somewhat the desmids in their reproduction.




These are all marine forms, many of great size, reaching a length in
some cases of a hundred metres or more, and showing a good deal of
differentiation in their tissues and organs.



One of the commonest forms is the ordinary rock weed (_Fucus_), which
covers the rocks of our northeastern coast with a heavy drapery for
several feet above low-water mark, so that the plants are completely
exposed as the tide recedes. The commonest species, _F. vesiculosus_
(Fig. 26, _A_), is distinguished by the air sacs with which the stems
are provided. The plant is attached to the rock by means of a sort of
disc or root from which springs a stem of tough, leathery texture, and
forking regularly at intervals, so that the ultimate branches are very
numerous, and the plant may reach a length of a metre or more. The
branches are flattened and leaf-like, the centre traversed by a
thickened midrib. The end of the growing branches is occupied by a
transversely elongated pit or depression. The growing point is at the
bottom of this pit, and by a regular forking of the growing point the
symmetrical branching of the plant is brought about. Scattered over
the surface are little circular pits through whose openings protrude
bunches of fine hairs. When wet the plant is flexible and leathery,
but it may become quite dry and hard without suffering, as may be seen
when the plants are exposed to the sun at low tide.

The air bladders are placed in pairs, for the most part, and buoy up
the plant, bringing it up to the surface when covered with water.

The interior of the plant is very soft and gelatinous, while the outer
part forms a sort of tough rind of much firmer consistence. The ends
of some of the branches (Fig. 26, _A_, _x_) are usually much swollen,
and the surface covered with little elevations from which may often be
seen protruding clusters of hairs like those arising from the other
parts of the plant. A section through one of these enlarged ends shows
that each elevation corresponds to a cavity situated below it. On some
of the plants these cavities are filled with an orange-yellow mass; in
others there are a number of roundish olive-brown bodies large enough
to be easily seen. The yellow masses are masses of antheridia; the
round bodies, the oögonia.

If the plants are gathered while wet, and packed so as to prevent
evaporation of the water, they will keep perfectly for several days,
and may readily be shipped for long distances. If they are to be
studied away from the seashore, sections for microscopic examination
should be mounted in salt water (about 3 parts in weight of common
salt to 100 of water). If fresh material is not to be had, dried
specimens or alcoholic material will answer pretty well.

  To study the minute structure of the plant, make a thin
  cross-section, and mount in salt water. The inner part or pith is
  composed of loosely arranged, elongated cells, placed end to end,
  and forming an irregular network, the large spaces between filled
  with the mucilaginous substance derived from the altered outer walls
  of these cells. This mucilage is hard when dry, but swells up
  enormously in water, especially fresh water. The cells grow smaller
  and more compact toward the outside of the section, until there are
  no spaces of any size between those of the outside or rind. The
  cells contain small chloroplasts like those of the higher plants,
  but owing to the presence of the brown pigment found in all of the
  class, in addition to the chlorophyll, they appear golden brown
  instead of green.

  No non-sexual reproductive bodies are known in the rock weeds,
  beyond small branches that occur in clusters on the margins of the
  main branches, and probably become detached, forming new plants. In
  some of the lower forms, however, _e.g._ _Ectocarpus_ and
  _Laminaria_ (Fig. 28, _A_, _C_), zoöspores are formed.

  The sexual organs of the rock weed, as we have already seen, are
  borne in special cavities (conceptacles) in the enlarged ends of
  some of the branches. In the species here figured, _F. vesiculosus_,
  the antheridia and oögonia are borne on separate plants; but in
  others, _e.g._ _F. platycarpus_, they are both in the same
  conceptacle.

  The walls of the conceptacle (Fig. 26, _B_) are composed of closely
  interwoven filaments, from which grow inward numerous hairs, filling
  up the space within, and often extending out through the opening at
  the top.

  The reproductive bodies arise from the base of these hairs. The
  oögonia (Fig. 26, _C_, _E_) arise as nearly colorless cells, that
  early become divided into two cells, a short basal cell or stalk and
  a larger terminal one, the oögonium proper. The latter enlarges
  rapidly, and its contents divide into eight parts. The division is
  at first indicated by a division of the central portion, which
  includes the nucleus, and is colored brown, into two, four, and
  finally eight parts, after which walls are formed between these. The
  brown color spreads until the whole oögonium is of a nearly uniform
  olive-brown tint.

  When ripe, the upper part of the oögonium dissolves, allowing the
  eight cells, still enclosed in a delicate membrane, to escape
  (Fig. 27, _H_). Finally, the walls separating the inner cells of the
  oögonium become also absorbed, as well as the surrounding membrane,
  and the eight egg cells escape into the water (Fig. 27, _I_) as
  naked balls of protoplasm, in which a central nucleus may be dimly
  seen.

  The antheridia (Fig. 26, _F_, _G_) are small oblong cells, at first
  colorless, but when ripe containing numerous glistening, reddish
  brown dots, each of which is part of a spermatozoid. When ripe, the
  contents of the antheridium are forced out into the water (_G_),
  leaving the empty outer wall behind, but still surrounded by a thin
  membrane. After a few minutes this membrane is dissolved, and the
  spermatozoids are set free. These (Fig. 27, _K_) are oval in form,
  with two long cilia attached to the side where the brown speck, seen
  while still within the antheridium, is conspicuous.

  The act of fertilization may be easily observed by laying fresh
  antheridia into a drop of water containing recently discharged egg
  cells. To obtain these, all that is necessary is to allow freshly
  gathered plants to remain in the air until they are somewhat dry,
  when the ripe sexual cells will be discharged from the openings of
  the conceptacles, exuding as little drops, those with antheridia
  being orange-yellow; the masses of oögonia, olive. Within a few
  minutes after putting the oögonia into water, the egg cells may be
  seen to escape into the water, when some of the antheridia may be
  added. The spermatozoids will be quickly discharged, and collect
  immediately in great numbers about the egg cells, to which they
  apply themselves closely, often setting them in rotation by the
  movements of their cilia, and presenting a most extraordinary
  spectacle (_J_). Owing to the small size of the spermatozoids, and
  the opacity of the eggs, it is impossible to see whether more than
  one spermatozoid penetrates it; but from what is known in other
  cases it is not likely. The egg now secretes a wall about itself,
  and within a short time begins to grow. It becomes pear-shaped, the
  narrow portion becoming attached to the parent plant or to some
  other object by means of rootlets, and the upper part grows into the
  body of the young plant (Fig. 27, _M_).


The simpler brown seaweeds, so far as known, multiply only by means of
zoöspores, which may grow directly into new plants, or, as has been
observed in some species, two zoöspores will first unite. A few, like
_Ectocarpus_ (Fig. 28, _A_), are simple, branched filaments, but most
are large plants with complex tissues. Of the latter, a familiar
example is the common kelp, "devil's apron" (_Laminaria_), often three
to four metres in length, with a stout stalk, provided with root-like
organs, by which it is firmly fastened. Above, it expands into a
broad, leaf-like frond, which in some species is divided into strips.
Related to the kelps is the giant kelp of the Pacific (_Macrocystis_),
which is said sometimes to reach a length of three hundred metres.


The highest of the class are the gulf weeds (_Sargassum_), plants of
the warmer seas, but one species of which is found from Cape Cod
southward (Fig. 28, _D_, _E_). These plants possess distinct stems and
leaves, and there are stalked air bladders, looking like berries,
giving the plant a striking resemblance to the higher land plants.









These are among the most beautiful and interesting members of the
plant kingdom, both on account of their beautiful colors and the
exquisitely graceful forms exhibited by many of them. Unfortunately
for inland students they are, with few exceptions, confined to salt
water, and consequently fresh material is not available. Nevertheless,
enough can be done with dried material to get a good idea of their
general appearance, and the fruiting plants can be readily preserved
in strong alcohol. Specimens, simply dried, may be kept for an
indefinite period, and on being placed in water will assume perfectly
the appearance of the living plants. Prolonged exposure, however, to
the action of fresh water extracts the red pigment that gives them
their characteristic color. This pigment is found in the chlorophyll
bodies, and usually quite conceals the chlorophyll, which, however,
becomes evident so soon as the red pigment is removed.

The red seaweeds differ much in the complexity of the plant body, but
all agree in the presence of the red pigment, and, at least in the
main, in their reproduction. The simpler ones consist of rows of
cells, usually branching like _Cladophora_; others form cell plates
comparable to _Ulva_ (Fig. 30, _C_, _D_); while others, among which is
the well-known Irish moss (_Chondrus_), form plants of considerable
size, with pretty well differentiated tissues. In such forms the outer
cells are smaller and firmer, constituting a sort of rind; while the
inner portions are made up of larger and looser cells, and may be
called the pith. Between these extremes are all intermediate forms.

They usually grow attached to rocks, shells, wood, or other plants,
such as the kelps and even the larger red seaweeds. They are most
abundant in the warmer seas, but still a considerable number may be
found in all parts of the ocean, even extending into the Arctic
regions.



The methods of reproduction may be best illustrated by a specific
example, and preferably one of the simpler ones, as these are most
readily studied microscopically.

The form here illustrated (_Callithamnion_) grows attached to wharves,
etc., below low-water mark, and is extremely delicate, collapsing
completely when removed from the water. The color is a bright rosy
red, and with its graceful form and extreme delicacy it makes one of
the most beautiful of the group.

If alcoholic material is used, it may be mounted for examination
either in water or very dilute glycerine.

  The plant is composed of much-branched, slender filaments, closely
  resembling _Cladophora_ in structure, but with smaller cells
  (Fig. 29, _B_). The non-sexual reproduction is by means of special
  spores, which from being formed in groups of four, are known as
  tetraspores. In the species under consideration the mother cell of
  the tetraspores arises as a small bud near the upper end of one of
  the ordinary cells (Fig. 29, _C_ i). This bud rapidly increases in
  size, assuming an oval form, and becoming cut off from the cell of
  the stem (Fig. 29, _C_ ii). The contents now divide into four equal
  parts, arranged like the quadrants of a sphere. When ripe, the wall
  of the mother cell gives way, and the four spores escape into the
  water and give rise to new plants. These spores, it will be noticed,
  differ in one important particular from corresponding spores in most
  algæ, in being unprovided with cilia, and incapable of spontaneous
  movement.

  Occasionally in the same plant that bears tetraspores, but more
  commonly in special ones, there are produced the sexual organs, and
  subsequently the sporocarps, or fruits, developed from them. The
  plants that bear them are usually stouter that the non-sexual ones,
  and the masses of ripe carpospores are large enough to be readily
  seen with the naked eye.

  If a plant bearing ripe spores is selected, the young stages of the
  female organ (procarp) may generally be found by examining the
  younger parts of the plant. The procarp arises from a single cell of
  the filament. This cell undergoes division by a series of
  longitudinal walls into a central cell and about four peripheral
  ones (Fig. 29, _D_ i). One of the latter divides next into an upper
  and a lower cell, the former growing out into a long, colorless
  appendage known as a trichogyne (Fig. 29, _D_, _tr._).

  The antheridia (Fig. 29, _E_) are hemispherical masses of closely
  set colorless cells, each of which develops a single spermatozoid
  which, like the tetraspores, is destitute of cilia, and is dependent
  upon the movement of the water to convey it to the neighborhood of
  the procarp. Occasionally one of these spermatozoids may be found
  attached to the trichogyne, and in this way fertilization is
  effected. Curiously enough, neither the cell which is immediately
  fertilized, nor the one beneath it, undergo any further change; but
  two of the other peripheral cells on opposite sides of the filament
  grow rapidly and develop into large, irregular masses of spores
  (Fig. 29, _D_ III, IV).

While the plant here described may be taken as a type of the group,
it must be borne in mind that many of them differ widely, not only in
the structure of the plant body, but in the complexity of the sexual
organs and spores as well. The tetraspores are often imbedded in the
tissues of the plant, or may be in special receptacles, nor are they
always arranged in the same way as here described, and the same is
true of the carpospores. These latter are in some of the higher forms,
_e.g._ _Polysiphonia_ (Fig. 29, _F_), contained in urn-shaped
receptacles, or they may be buried within the tissues of the plant.


The fresh-water forms are not common, but may occasionally be met with
in mill streams and other running water, attached to stones and
woodwork, but are much inferior in size and beauty to the marine
species. The red color is not so pronounced, and they are, as a rule,
somewhat dull colored.



The commonest genera are _Batrachospermum_ and _Lemanea_ (Fig. 31).











The name "Fungi" has been given to a vast assemblage of plants,
varying much among themselves, but on the whole of about the same
structural rank as the algæ. Unlike the algæ, however, they are
entirely destitute of chlorophyll, and in consequence are dependent
upon organic matter for food, some being parasites (growing upon
living organisms), others saprophytes (feeding on dead matter). Some
of them show close resemblances in structure to certain algæ, and
there is reason to believe that they are descended from forms that
originally had chlorophyll; others are very different from any green
plants, though more or less evidently related among themselves.
Recognizing then these distinctions, we may make two divisions of the
sub-kingdom: I. The Alga-Fungi (_Phycomycetes_), and II. The True
Fungi (_Mycomycetes_).




These are fungi consisting of long, undivided, often branching tubular
filaments, resembling quite closely those of _Vaucheria_ or other
_Siphoneæ_, but always destitute of any trace of chlorophyll. The
simplest of these include the common moulds (_Mucorini_), one of which
will serve to illustrate the characteristics of the order.

If a bit of fresh bread, slightly moistened, is kept under a bell jar
or tumbler in a warm room, in the course of twenty-four hours or so it
will be covered with a film of fine white threads, and a little later
will produce a crop of little globular bodies mounted on upright
stalks. These are at first white, but soon become black, and the
filaments bearing them also grow dark-colored.

These are moulds, and have grown from spores that are in the
atmosphere falling on the bread, which offers the proper conditions
for their growth and multiplication.

One of the commonest moulds is the one here figured (Fig. 32), and
named _Mucor stolonifer_, from the runners, or "stolons," by which it
spreads from one point to another. As it grows it sends out these
runners along the surface of the bread, or even along the inner
surface of the glass covering it. They fasten themselves at intervals
to the substratum, and send up from these points clusters of short
filaments, each one tipped with a spore case, or "sporangium."

  For microscopical study they are best mounted in dilute glycerine
  (about one-quarter glycerine to three-quarters pure water). After
  carefully spreading out the specimens in this mixture, allow a drop
  of alcohol to fall upon the preparation, and then put on the cover
  glass. The alcohol drives out the air, which otherwise interferes
  badly with the examination.

  The whole plant consists of a very long, much-branched, but
  undivided tubular filament. Where it is in contact with the
  substratum, root-like outgrowths are formed, not unlike those
  observed in _Vaucheria_. At first the walls are colorless, but later
  become dark smoky brown in color. A layer of colorless granular
  protoplasm lines the wall, becoming more abundant toward the growing
  tips of the branches. The spore cases, "sporangia," arise at the
  ends of upright branches (Fig. 32, _C_), which at first are
  cylindrical (_a_), but later enlarge at the end (_b_), and become
  cut off by a convex wall (_c_). This wall pushes up into the young
  sporangium, forming a structure called the "columella." When fully
  grown, the sporangium is globular, and appears quite opaque, owing
  to the numerous granules in the protoplasm filling the space between
  the columella and its outer wall. This protoplasm now divides into a
  great number of small oval cells (spores), which rapidly darken,
  owing to a thick, black wall formed about each one, and at the same
  time the columella and the stalk of the sporangium become
  dark-colored.

  When ripe, the wall of the sporangium dissolves, and the spores
  (Fig. 32, _E_) are set free. The columella remains unchanged, and
  some of the spores often remain sticking to it (Fig. 32, _D_).



  Spores formed in a manner strongly recalling those of the pond scums
  are also known, but only occur after the plants have grown for a
  long time, and hence are rarely met with (Fig. 32, _I_).

Another common mould (_M. mucedo_), often growing in company with the
one described, differs from it mainly in the longer stalk of the
sporangium, which is also smaller, and in not forming runners. This
species sometimes bears clusters of very small sporangia attached to
the middle of the ordinary sporangial filament (Fig. 32, _F_, _H_).
These small sporangia have no columella.

Other moulds are sometimes met with, parasitic upon the larger species
of _Mucor_.

Related to the black moulds are the insect moulds (_Entomopthoreæ_),
which attack and destroy insects. The commonest of these attacks the
house flies in autumn, when the flies, thus infested, may often be
found sticking to window panes, and surrounded by a whitish halo of
the spores that have been thrown off by the fungus.




These are exclusively parasitic fungi, and grow within the tissues of
various flowering plants, sometimes entirely destroying them.

As a type of this group we will select a very common one (_Cystopus
bliti_), that is always to be found in late summer and autumn growing
on pig weed (_Amarantus_). It forms whitish, blister-like blotches
about the size of a pin head on the leaves and stems, being commonest
on the under side of the leaves (Fig. 33, _A_). In the earlier stages
the leaf does not appear much affected, but later becomes brown and
withered about the blotches caused by the fungus.

  If a thin vertical section of the leaf is made through one of these
  blotches, and mounted as described for _Mucor_, the latter is found
  to be composed of a mass of spores that have been produced below the
  epidermis of the leaf, and have pushed it up by their growth. If the
  section is a very thin one, we may be able to make out the structure
  of the fungus, and then find it to be composed of irregular,
  tubular, much-branched filaments, which, however, are not divided by
  cross-walls. These filaments run through the intercellular spaces of
  the leaf, and send into the cells little globular suckers, by means
  of which the fungus feeds.

  The spores already mentioned are formed at the ends of crowded
  filaments, that push up, and finally rupture the epidermis (Fig. 33,
  _B_). They are formed by the ends of the filaments swelling up and
  becoming constricted, so as to form an oval spore, which is then cut
  off by a wall. The portion of the filament immediately below acts in
  the same way, and the process is repeated until a chain of half a
  dozen or more may be produced, the lowest one being always the last
  formed. When ripe, the spores are separated by a thin neck, and
  become very easily broken off.

  In order to follow their germination it is only necessary to place a
  few leaves with fresh patches of the fungus under a bell jar or
  tumbler, inverted over a dish full of water, so as to keep the air
  within saturated with moisture, but taking care to keep the leaves
  out of the water. After about twenty-four hours, if some of the
  spores are scraped off and mounted in water, they will germinate in
  the course of an hour or so. The contents divide into about eight
  parts, which escape from the top of the spore, which at this time
  projects as a little papilla. On escaping, each mass of protoplasm
  swims away as a zoöspore, with two extremely delicate cilia. After a
  short time it comes to rest, and, after developing a thin cell wall,
  germinates by sending out one or two filaments (Fig. 33, _C_, _E_).



  Under normal conditions the spores probably germinate when the
  leaves are wet, and the filaments enter the plant through the
  breathing pores on the lower surface of the leaves, and spread
  rapidly through the intercellular spaces.

  Later on, spores of a very different kind are produced. Unlike those
  already studied, they are formed some distance below the epidermis,
  and in order to study them satisfactorily, the fungus must be freed
  from the host plant. In order to do this, small pieces of the leaf
  should be boiled for about a minute in strong caustic potash, and
  then treated with acetic or hydrochloric acid. By this means the
  tissues of the leaf become so soft as to be readily removed, while
  the fungus is but little affected. The preparation should now be
  washed and mounted in dilute glycerine.

  The spores (oöspores) are much larger than those first formed, and
  possess an outer coat of a dark brown color (Fig. 33, _H_). Each
  spore is contained in a large cell, which arises as a swelling of
  one of the filaments, and becomes shut off by a wall. At first
  (Fig. 33, _F_) its contents are granular, and fill it completely,
  but later contract to form a globular mass of protoplasm (G.
  _o_), the germ cell or egg cell. The whole is an oögonium, and
  differs in no essential respect from that of _Vaucheria_.

  Frequently a smaller cell (antheridium), arising from a neighboring
  filament, and in close contact with the oögonium, may be detected
  (Fig. 33, _F_, _G_, _an._), and in exceptionally favorable cases a
  tube is to be seen connecting it with the germ cell, and by means of
  which fertilization is effected.

  After being fertilized, the germ cell secretes a wall, at first thin
  and colorless, but later becoming thick and dark-colored on the
  outside, and showing a division into several layers, the outermost
  of which is dark brown, and covered with irregular reticulate
  markings. These spores do not germinate at once, but remain over
  winter unchanged.


It is by no means impossible that sometimes the germ cell may develop
into a spore without being fertilized, as is the case in many of the
water moulds.

Closely related to the species above described is another one
(_C. candidus_), which attacks shepherd's-purse, radish, and others of
the mustard family, upon which it forms chalky white blotches, and
distorts the diseased parts of the plant very greatly.

  For some reasons this is the best species for study, longitudinal
  sections through the stem showing very beautifully the structure of
  the fungus, and the penetration of the cells of the host[4] by the
  suckers (Fig. 34).

[4] "Host," the plant or animal upon which a parasite lives.



Very similar to the white rusts in most respects, but differing in the
arrangement of the non-sexual spores, are the mildews (_Peronospora_,
_Phytophthora_). These plants form mouldy-looking patches on the
leaves and stems of many plants, and are often very destructive. Among
them are the vine mildew (_Peronospora viticola_) (Fig. 35), the
potato fungus (_Phytophthora infestans_), and many others.




These plants resemble quite closely the white rusts, and are probably
related to them. They grow on decaying organic matter in water, or
sometimes on living water animals, fish, crustaceans, etc. They may
usually be had for study by throwing into water taken from a stagnant
pond or aquarium, a dead fly or some other insect. After a few days it
will probably be found covered with a dense growth of fine, white
filaments, standing out from it in all directions (Fig. 36, _A_).
Somewhat later, if carefully examined with a lens, little round, white
bodies may be seen scattered among the filaments.



  On carefully removing a bit of the younger growth and examining it
  microscopically, it is found to consist of long filaments much like
  those of _Vaucheria_, but entirely destitute of chlorophyll. In
  places these filaments are filled with densely granular protoplasm,
  which when highly magnified exhibits streaming movements. The
  protoplasm contains a large amount of oil in the form of small,
  shining drops.

  In the early stages of its growth the plant multiplies by zoöspores,
  produced in great numbers in sporangia at the ends of the branches.
  The protoplasm collects here much as we saw in _V. sessilis_, the
  end of the filament becoming club-shaped and ending in a short
  protuberance (Fig. 36, _B_). This end becomes separated by a wall,
  and the contents divide into numerous small cells that sometimes are
  naked, and sometimes have a delicate membrane about them. The first
  sign of division is the appearance in the protoplasm of delicate
  lines dividing it into numerous polygonal areas which soon become
  more distinct, and are seen to be distinct cells whose outlines
  remain more or less angular on account of the mutual pressure. When
  ripe, the end of the sporangium opens, and the contained cells are
  discharged (Fig. 36, _C_). In case they have no membrane, they swim
  away at once, each being provided with two cilia, and resembling
  almost exactly the zoöspores of the white rust (Fig. 36, _D_, _E_).
  When the cells are surrounded by a membrane they remain for some
  time at rest, but finally the contents escape as a zoöspore, like
  those already described. By killing the zoöspores with a little
  iodine the granular nature of the protoplasm is made more evident,
  and the cilia may be seen. They soon come to rest, and germinate in
  the same way as those of the white rusts and mildews.

  As soon as the sporangium is emptied, a new one is formed, either by
  the filament growing up through it (Fig. 36, _F_) and the end being
  again cut off, or else by a branch budding out just below the base
  of the empty sporangium, and growing up by the side of it.

  Besides zoöspores there are also resting spores developed. Oögonia
  like those of _Vaucheria_ or the _Peronosporeæ_ are formed usually
  after the formation of zoöspores has ceased; but in many cases,
  perhaps all, these develop without being fertilized. Antheridia are
  often wanting, and even when they are present, it is very doubtful
  whether fertilization takes place.[5]

[5] The antheridia, when present, arise as branches just below the
oögonium, and become closely applied to it, sometimes sending tubes
through its wall, but there has been no satisfactory demonstration of
an actual transfer of the contents of the antheridium to the egg cell.

  The oögonia (Fig. 36, _G_, _H_) arise at the end of the main
  filaments, or of short side branches, very much as do the sporangia,
  from which they differ at this stage in being of globular form. The
  contents contract to form one or several egg cells, naked at first,
  but later becoming thick-walled resting spores (_H_).









The great majority of the plants ordinarily known as _fungi_ are
embraced under this head. While some of the lower forms show
affinities with the _Phycomycetes_, and through them with the algæ,
the greater number differ very strongly from all green plants both in
their habits and in their structure and reproduction. It is a
much-disputed point whether sexual reproduction occurs in any of them,
and it is highly probable that in the great majority, at any rate, the
reproduction is purely non-sexual.

Probably to be reckoned with the _Mycomycetes_, but of doubtful
affinities, are the small unicellular fungi that are the main causes
of alcoholic fermentation; these are the yeast fungi (_Saccharomycetes_).
They cause the fermentation of beer and wine, as well as the incipient
fermentation in bread, causing it to "rise" by the giving off of
bubbles of carbonic acid gas during the process.

If a little common yeast is put into water containing starch or sugar,
and kept in a warm place, in a short time bubbles of gas will make
their appearance, and after a little longer time alcohol may be
detected by proper tests; in short, alcoholic fermentation is taking
place in the solution.

  If a little of the fermenting liquid is examined microscopically, it
  will be found to contain great numbers of very small, oval cells,
  with thin cell walls and colorless contents. A careful examination
  with a strong lens (magnifying from 500-1000 diameters) shows that
  the protoplasm, in which are granules of varying size, does not fill
  the cell completely, but that there are one or more large vacuoles
  or spaces filled with colorless cell sap. No nucleus is visible in
  the living cell, but it has been shown that a nucleus is present.

  If growth is active, many of the cells will be seen dividing. The
  process is somewhat different from ordinary fission and is called
  budding (Fig. 37, _B_). A small protuberance appears at the bud or
  at the side of the cell, and enlarges rapidly, assuming the form of
  the mother cell, from which it becomes completely separated by the
  constriction of the base, and may fall off at once, or, as is more
  frequently the case, may remain attached for a time, giving rise
  itself to other buds, so that not infrequently groups of half a
  dozen or more cells are met with (Fig. 37, _B_, _C_).


That the yeast cells are the principal agents of alcoholic
fermentation may be shown in much the same way that bacteria are shown
to cause ordinary decomposition. Liquids from which they are excluded
will remain unfermented for an indefinite time.

There has been much controversy as to the systematic position of the
yeast fungi, which has not yet been satisfactorily settled, the
question being whether they are to be regarded as independent plants
or only one stage in the life history of some higher fungi (possibly
the _Smuts_), which through cultivation have lost the power of
developing further.




The smuts are common and often very destructive parasitic fungi,
living entirely within the tissues of the higher plants. Owing to
this, as well as to the excessively small spores and difficulty in
germinating them, the plants are very difficult of study, except in a
general way, and we will content ourselves with a glance at one of the
common forms, the corn smut (_Ustillago maydis_). This familiar fungus
attacks Indian corn, forming its spores in enormous quantities in
various parts of the diseased plant, but particularly in the flowers
("tassel" and young ear).

  The filaments, which resemble somewhat those of the white rusts,
  penetrate all parts of the plant, and as the time approaches for the
  formation of the spores, these branch extensively, and at the same
  time become soft and mucilaginous (Fig. 38, _B_). The ends of these
  short branches enlarge rapidly and become shut off by partitions,
  and in each a globular spore (Fig. 38, _C_) is produced. The outer
  wall is very dark-colored and provided with short spines. To study
  the filaments and spore formation, very thin sections should be made
  through the young kernels or other parts in the vicinity, before
  they are noticeably distorted by the growth of the spore-bearing
  filaments.



As the spores are forming, an abnormal growth is set up in the cells
of the part attacked, which in consequence becomes enormously enlarged
(Fig. 38, _A_), single grains sometimes growing as large as a walnut.
As the spores ripen, the affected parts, which are at first white,
become a livid gray, due to the black spores shining through the
overlying white tissues. Finally the masses of spores burst through
the overlying cells, appearing like masses of soot, whence the popular
name for the plant.

The remaining _Mycomycetes_ are pretty readily divisible into two
great classes, based upon the arrangement of the spores. The first of
these is known as the _Ascomycetes_ (Sac fungi), the other the
_Basidiomycetes_ (mushrooms, puff-balls, etc.).




This class includes a very great number of common plants, all
resembling each other in producing spores in sacs (_asci_, sing.
_ascus_) that are usually oblong in shape, and each containing eight
spores, although the number is not always the same. Besides the spores
formed in these sacs (ascospores), there are other forms produced in
various ways.

There are two main divisions of the class, the first including only a
few forms, most of which are not likely to be met with by the student.
In these the spore sacs are borne directly upon the filaments without
any protective covering. The only form that is at all common is a
parasitic fungus (_Exoascus_) that attacks peach-trees, causing the
disease of the leaves known as "curl."

All of the common _Ascomycetes_ belong to the second division, and
have the spore sacs contained in special structures called spore
fruits, that may reach a diameter of several centimetres in a few
cases, though ordinarily much smaller.

Among the simpler members of this group are the mildews
(_Perisporiaceæ_), mostly parasitic forms, living upon the leaves and
stems of flowering plants, sometimes causing serious injury by their
depredations. They form white or grayish downy films on the surface of
the plant, in certain stages looking like hoar-frost. Being very
common, they may be readily obtained, and are easily studied. One of
the best species for study (_Podosphæra_) grows abundantly on the
leaves of the dandelion, especially when the plants are growing under
unfavorable conditions. The same species is also found on other plants
of the same family. It may be found at almost any time during the
summer; but for studying, the spore fruits material should be
collected in late summer or early autumn. It at first appears as
white, frost-like patches, growing dingier as it becomes older, and
careful scrutiny of the older specimens will show numerous brown or
blackish specks scattered over the patches. These are the spore
fruits.



  For microscopical study, fresh material may be used, or, if
  necessary, dried specimens. The latter, before mounting, should be
  soaked for a short time in water, to which has been added a few
  drops of caustic-potash solution. This will remove the brittleness,
  and swell up the dried filaments to their original proportions. A
  portion of the plant should be carefully scraped off the leaf on
  which it is growing, thoroughly washed in pure water, and
  transferred to a drop of water or very dilute glycerine, in which it
  should be carefully spread out with needles. If air bubbles
  interfere with the examination, they may be driven off with alcohol,
  and then the cover glass put on. If the specimen is mounted in
  glycerine, it will keep indefinitely, if care is taken to seal it
  up. The plant consists of much-interlaced filaments, divided at
  intervals by cross-walls.[6] They are nearly colorless, and the
  contents are not conspicuous. These filaments send up vertical
  branches (Fig. 39, _A_), that become divided into a series of short
  cells by means of cross-walls. The cells thus formed are at first
  cylindrical, but later bulge out at the sides, becoming broadly
  oval, and finally become detached as spores (_conidia_). It is these
  spores that give the frosty appearance to the early stages of the
  fungus when seen with the naked eye. The spores fall off very easily
  when ripe, and germinate quickly in water, sending out two or more
  tubes that grow into filaments like those of the parent plant
  (Fig. 39, _B_).

[6] The filaments are attached to the surface of the leaf by suckers,
which are not so readily seen in this species as in some others. A
mildew growing abundantly in autumn on the garden chrysanthemum,
however, shows them very satisfactorily if a bit of the epidermis of a
leaf on which the fungus is just beginning to grow is sliced off with
a sharp razor and mounted in dilute glycerine, or water, removing the
air with alcohol. These suckers are then seen to be globular bodies,
penetrating the outer wall of the cell (Fig. 40).



  The spore fruits, as already observed, are formed toward the end of
  the season, and, in the species under consideration at least, appear
  to be the result of a sexual process. The sexual organs (if they are
  really such) are extremely simple, and, owing to their very small
  size, are not easily found.They arise as short branches at a point
  where two filaments cross; one of them (Fig. 39, _C_, _ar._), the
  female cell, or "archicarp," is somewhat larger than the other and
  nearly oval in form, and soon becomes separated by a partition from
  the filament that bears it. The other branch (antheridium) grows up
  in close contact with the archicarp, and like it is shut off by a
  partition from its filament. It is more slender than the archicarp,
  but otherwise differs little from it. No actual communication can be
  shown to be present between the two cells, and it is therefore still
  doubtful whether fertilization really takes place. Shortly after
  these organs are full-grown, several short branches grow up about
  them, and soon completely envelop them (_D_, _E_). These branches
  soon grow together, and cross-walls are formed in them, so that the
  young spore fruit appears surrounded by a single layer of cells,
  sufficiently transparent, however, to allow a view of the interior.

  The antheridium undergoes no further change, but the archicarp soon
  divides into two cells,--a small basal one and a larger upper cell.
  There next grow from the inner surface of the covering cells, short
  filaments, that almost completely fill the space between the
  archicarp and the wall. An optical section of such a stage (Fig. 39,
  _F_) shows a double wall and the two cells of the archicarp. The
  spore fruit now enlarges rapidly, and the outer cells become first
  yellow and then dark brown, the walls becoming thicker and harder as
  they change color. Sometimes special filaments or appendages grow
  out from their outer surfaces, and these are also dark-colored.
  Shortly before the fruit is ripe, the upper cell of the archicarp,
  which has increased many times in size, shows a division of its
  contents into eight parts, each of which develops a wall and becomes
  an oval spore. By crushing the ripe spore fruit, these spores still
  enclosed in the mother cell (ascus) may be forced out (Fig. 39,
  _H_). These spores do not germinate at once, but remain dormant
  until the next year.



  Frequently other structures, resembling somewhat the spore fruits,
  are found associated with them (Fig. 39, _I_, _K_), and were for a
  long time supposed to be a special form of reproductive organ; but
  they are now known to belong to another fungus (_Cicinnobulus_),
  parasitic upon the mildew. They usually appear at the base of the
  chains of conidia, causing the basal cell to enlarge to many times
  its original size, and finally kill the young conidia, which shrivel
  up. A careful examination reveals the presence of very fine
  filaments within those of the mildew, which may be traced up to the
  base of the conidial branch, where the receptacle of the parasite is
  forming. The spores contained in these receptacles are very small
  (Fig. 39, _K_), and when ripe exude in long, worm-shaped masses, if
  the receptacle is placed in water.

The mildews may be divided into two genera: _Podosphæra_, with a
single ascus in the spore fruit; and _Erysiphe_, with two or more. In
the latter the archicarp branches, each branch bearing a spore sac
(Fig. 41, _B_).

The appendages growing out from the wall of the spore fruit are often
very beautiful in form, and the two genera given above are often
subdivided according to the form of these appendages.

A common mould closely allied to the mildews is found on various
articles of food when allowed to remain damp, and is also very common
on botanical specimens that have been poorly dried, and hence is often
called "herbarium mould" (_Eurotium herbariorum_).


  The conidia are of a greenish color, and produced on the ends of
  upright branches which are enlarged at the end, and from which grow
  out little prominences, which give rise to the conidia in the same
  way as we have seen in the mildews (Fig. 42, _A_).

  Spore fruits much like those of the mildews are formed later, and
  are visible to the naked eye as little yellow grains (Fig. 42, _D_).
  These contain numerous very small spore sacs (_E_), each with eight
  spores.

There are numerous common species of _Eurotium_, differing in color
and size, some being yellow or black, and larger than the ordinary
green form.

Another form, common everywhere on mouldy food of all kinds, as well
as in other situations, is the blue mould (_Penicillium_). This, in
general appearance, resembles almost exactly the herbarium mould, but
is immediately distinguishable by a microscopic examination (Fig. 42,
_G_).
